Okay, this is Ron Shorn in Boulder, Colorado,
interviewing Rita F. Beebe on October 21st, 1993.
Rita, for the record, could you give your full
name?
Rita Faye Jenkins Beebe. Okay, and when and where
were you born? In Pritchett, Colorado, October
10th, 1936. How do you spell Pritchett?
T-R-I-T-C-H-E-T-T but I don't believe it exists
anymore. Where did you get interested in
astronomy at the beginning?
I had a strange childhood. I grew up near Boulder,
Colorado. My father was 54 years old when I was
born. He was a cow puncher in his younger days and
had settled into ranching and farming by the time I
came along. As a cowpuncher, he spent a
considerable number of winters with remittance
men in line shacks. And these people were people
who were very well-schooled dropouts from
Eastern culture in those days. My father's
interest, having had only a third-grade
education, was in nature and the knowledge he had
accumulated was that of a naturalist in the old
fashioned sense. So I grew up believing everybody
knew about constellations and everybody asked
questions about stars. I had mechanical
tendencies and was frequently accused of
stealing my father's tools when he lost them and
that sort of thing and having no brothers to
compete with. I was allowed to develop my
interests I developed sort of a two-pronged
interest in the fact that I also wanted to be an
artist, and I actually spent the first two years of
my college days majoring in art before I turned
back to the physical sciences. Where did you go to
undergraduate school? I went to art school at
Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas, and the
Kansas City Art Institute, and then returned to
Colorado University. Why did you go to Kansas?
Fellowships. All right, so then you went back
after you left art school and went to? Colorado
University. Okay, in Boulder. Yes. And what did
you major in there? Chemistry. Chemistry. Why
chemistry? Because at that time I was going to be a
veterinarian, and I couldn't put the financial
package together for that. So then I moved into
teaching junior high school, junior high school,
We went into an extensive curriculum
development, and I moved into teaching earth
science, and after three years of that, then I came
back to graduate school. Okay, when did you get
your bachelor's degree? Fifty-nine. Okay, and
when did you enter graduate school? In 62, I guess?
Yeah. Where did you go to grad school? Indiana
University. Why did you pick Indiana? Previous to
Indiana University, I went back to the University
of Idaho for two years to upgrade my physics and
mathematics. And then did a survey of graduate
schools. And I got married in 59. So that parallel
to my development, my husband was doing the same
thing. So we were going to enter graduate school
together. And we picked Indiana because they gave
us a double financial package that we needed. How
long did you stay at Indiana as a grad student? When
did you get out? Sixty-nine. Sixty-nine. What was
your doctoral dissertation and who was your
advisor? The work was on R. Cygnus, a red giant star
with anomalous heavy metal abundance. My thesis
advisor was Benjamin Franklin Peary.
OK, so you got your PhD in when? October of 69. I
covered that. So where did you go after that? When
did your husband get his degree? He got his in
September of 69. He got a position at New Mexico
State University as an assistant professor in
astronomy. I had worked as a graduate student at
Los Alamos. And at that time, there were not two
jobs available. But I was well enough established
at Los Alamos that I could continue to consult part
time. And we were working on molecular opacities
calculations. And that was quite compatible. The
New Mexico State University gave me office space
and computer access free of charge. So it was quite
a comfortable arrangement. Okay, and what were
you working on there? I was interacting with the
Los Alamos group, working on opacities. Then in
January of that year, I began to work with Brad
Smith. Okay, how did that come about? Elmer Rees
had developed quite a few measurements of drift
rates of clouds in the atmosphere of Jupiter. He
had lost his collaborator, Gordon Solberg, to
controversial political issues and needed some
assistance. So I started working just part time on
the Los Alamos situation and part time for Brad
Smith to help Elmer Reese with that
interpretation.
OK. How long did that happen? I mean, how long did
you stay in that position doing that kind of work?
After about a year, we wrote new proposals and I
became fully funded in the study of Jupiter's
atmosphere and worked as a research associate
until 1974. Okay. And what did you do research on
until 1974? Jupiter and Venus ground-based data.
Okay. What kind of data? Photographic. Okay. What
happened in 1974? 1974, Brad Smith left New Mexico
State, moved to the University of Arizona. And I
was selected to replace him as a tender track
assistant professor of astronomy. And what's
happened to your career since then? We continued
to study Jupiter. And in 1977, I joined the Voyager
team to assist in the targeting of the imaging and
continue to work on that project. Since Voyager
wound down, what have your interests been? I moved
over to Hubble Space Telescope. I've been
principal investigator on teams that are
utilizing the WIFPIC planetary camera mode and
the faint object spectrograph to do correlative
studies of changes in wind fields, cloud wave
formation, and spectroscopic data. When you
first got into planetary astronomy, did you feel
that real, quote, unquote, astronomy was
considered at second rate?
I have been known to say that I haven't experienced
sexual discrimination. I've experienced racial
discrimination. Yes, there has been a general
tendency to do that. I consider it a lack of ego on
their part. I think they feel grossly challenged
because when we attempt to do our work, we have
higher spatial resolution. We have more
information. Our physical interpretations are
frequently more sophisticated than theirs. Do
you think planetary astronomy is a little more
respected now than it was when you first got into
the game? Yes, I think so.
What was planetary astronomy like when you first
got into it? I mean, size, attitudes, the kind of
people that were in it as compared to now?
Actually,
by the time I really started participating in
activities outside of New Mexico State, there was
a fair amount of excitement about it. I remember
the second Division of Planetary Sciences
meeting was in Tallahassee.
I found that meeting extremely exciting. I found
another thing about it rather strange in the sense
that I encountered strange discrimination. I was
not allowed to buy my own drinks in that state at
that time as a female, although I was at that point
in time becoming recognized as a working
scientist. The culture hadn't caught up with it
yet, definitely. What's the best piece of work
you've done?
The
coordination, the targeting, and the
interpretation of Voyager 1 Jupiter encounter.
The really satisfying thing about that encounter
was, yes, we did know a lot about these clouds, and
yes, we did know how to find them. And much of the
work that we had done before that, that people felt
might be over-interpreting the limited
ground-based resolution, then became accepted.
So that in retrospect, we could go backward and put
even more physical constraints on the atmosphere
than the Voyager data itself allowed. Did
anything about the Voyager information about
Jupiter surprise you?
I hadn't done a lot of consideration about the
magnetic field or the surface conditions of the
satellites before we arrived. Those were
surprising to me, and part of it was that I hadn't
pushed as hard as I probably should have in those
areas.
the atmospheric results, I would say satisfied
me. That was wonderful to see that much of what we
thought was true really was and to just gain higher
and higher resolution. Voyager 1 was wonderful
because we had almost 90 days of that trip in the
sense that every day I went in I was seeing a little
higher resolution, a little more of the
understanding, so it really was a wonderful
thing. I'll never live through another trip like
that. Have you had any dead ends or fiascos or
things that you wish you wouldn't have gotten
involved with? I wish I had the time back that I have
spent trying to figure out what triggers
disturbances in Jupiter's atmosphere. I've
looked at almost every combination of
satellites, tides, all sorts of things, and every
one of them is just pulled up as a dead end. If I had
that time back, I could probably do some very nice
stuff with it. Where was your first encounter with
National Aeronautics and Space Administration?
When did they first give you money or put you on a
board or something? Seventy-four. And that was?
That was a grant,
yes. Okay. All right, and you've had frequent
contact with NASA since then. Quite so. How do you
think they handle the management of planetary
science in general? My feeling is that the people
who have been managing my contracts are
excellent. It's the structure above that. And the
financial structures have become very
complicated. Gerard de Bacallure was very strong
in saying that he was really annoyed at the fact
that NASA would get some pretty pictures out of a
probe and then not support the follow-on
research, just cut things off. Did you find that
was true? I have aggressively worked to keep M.O.
and D.A. financed over the years, and yes, it's a
constant problem, and it's a real problem simply
because it is the one thing that can be delayed. So
that it's sitting there always vulnerable for any
sort of a taxation or a budget cut It's the one
that's sticking out in the wind ready to be clipped
off. And that's not just NASA. That happens
everywhere, in business and everywhere. You can
always delay the fine analysis of a project so that
it's just an ongoing problem. People who are
involved in it will continually have to fight.
Where do you think Planetary astronomy today
would be if it wasn't for the money that NASA put
into it in the last 30 years.
Well, I suppose it would still be back in the realm
of astrology, quite frankly. Because there
really was a huge resistance to letting it grow
academically. And that came not only from the
classical astronomers, but it also came from the
classical physicists. because it was their
territory that would be encroached in academia.
And without NASA, this area would have been
expected to exist in academia. There were several
big funding crunches in NASA history. One was in
73, one was in 81, and it looks like we're getting
another one now. And things have been tight for a
number of years. When you get an intelligent
student or intelligent students who say, gee, I
want to go into grad school and be a planetary
astronomer, what do you tell them now? Well, I have
a discussion with them about the potential, but my
own attitude, which I convey to them, is that if
they are good enough, they will probably be able to
survive in it. and quite frankly, if they wanted to
become an architect, or any of the other applied
physical sciences where your real survival is
your own creativity, they'll have the same kind of
tough time. Now, if they're second rate, I will do
my best to encourage them to decide that they
really would rather do something else. There's
been some talk lately of turning NASA into the
national... Aeronautics Administration giving
space research to the Air Force, who already does a
lot. And of course, before there was an NSA, the Air
Force poured a lot of money into planetary
astronomy and related topics.
If that happened, would you mind working for the
Air Force? No.
We're at a division for... Don't forget I've
already worked for Los Alamos. I like the idea that
there are a few intelligent people working for the
agencies who develop our ability to go to war. I
don't want that left to people who are warriors by
nature.
We're at the Division for Planetary Sciences of
the American Astronomical Society meeting. 25
years ago, 26 years ago, there was no special
organization for planetary astronomy. And in
fact, there was no special journal for planetary
astronomy. And now there's Icarus and also the
Journal for Geophysical Research-Planet. Do you
think that this specialization has been good,
bad, indifferent, inevitable? What's your
opinion? I think the specialization has been
good. I think the fact that it's been recognized as
an area that should have been pursued and
developed has changed the basic attitude of
ordinary people. When you walk into an elementary
classroom or a group of freshman students, their
concept of their surroundings has been grossly
modified by the space program. and it's been
modified in a constructive way in the sense that
they have been able to see more than one planet.
They have seen things that are as spectacular as
science fiction can deliver to them, and they have
been introduced to the concept of cause and effect
in a very graphical way that has led them not only to
know that this sort of logic exists, but to expect
it, to expect there to be an explanation of the
spectacular. Since you've done both, you're an
appropriate person to ask, do you ever get annoyed
when some popular book or TV show claims that
spacecraft discovered everything we know about
the solar
system? It doesn't bother me that much. Because
quite honestly,
spacecraft has brought it to the attention of the
public. I certainly attempt to correct that over
time. Do you think that planetary astronomy is a
part of astronomy? Definitely. Just, there's one
other thing I don't know. Astronomy is a part of
NASA. The traditional astronomy is, by a very
large part, now funded by NASA. The breakdown
between NSF and NASA is shocking to me. I mean, the
entire field of astronomy is now dependent, for
most of its support, from NASA. This came with the
development of the great observatory projects
and that sort of thing. Like the Hubble Space
Telescope. The shift is huge. NSF is supporting
very little of the whole astronomical academic
community at this point. Do you think that's good
or bad? I think it's bad. I think we've slid into a
situation. Any time you have federal funding for
projects that are pushing technology, the number
of people in the field will expand to the limit that
those projects can accept. And we've had this
major expansion in all of the areas, and it can't
continue to expand. The fact that we're suffering
a budget crunch is caused by many different
aspects, and one is 25 years of expansion of these
fields. Let me ask you, how old do you consider
planetary astronomy to be? Because there's two
schools of thought. One says it didn't really
begin until Galileo had the sky in the telescope.
And others would say, well, it started back when
the first Swiss lake dweller looked at the sky and
saw that Venus was this bright thing in the sky
after sunset. What's your opinion? Actually, I
think Planetary science as such really started in
the 50s.
Before that, it was a part of our natural science
lore. And in the 1950s, people began to understand
spectroscopy enough to realize that they could do
some very significant remote sensing. They began
to look for general physical explanations. They
began to do detailed studies. A classical one is
Kuiper's study of trying to understand the red
spot. A beautiful study in the sense that that,
again, here was the real realization that we could
expand ourselves, stretch ourselves, and really
push the concept of cause and effect. And to me,
that was the point that the field that we call
planetary science, where we're really relating
other planets to the Earth instead of saying these
are wonderful things with some mystic properties
associated with them. We're saying these are
different cases of the same thing we have here. To
me, that's when planetary science, as I see
planetary science, began. Of all the discoveries
that have come about in the last 30 years, what Was
it really most astounding to you, the one that
you'd say, I never would have thought of that, or I
never would have believed that? The volcanoes on
Mars. There was just something wonderful about
them. I was ready to accept that Mars had never had
plate tectonics. But it had never occurred to me
that instead of plate tectonics, you would have
activity that just sat there and piled up. That
concept is just neat. Do you think planetary
astronomers and planetary scientists have done a
good job in selling themselves, or as good a job as
they could have, to the public and to the Congress?
I think they've done an excellent job of selling
themselves to the public. I travel a lot. I'm on a
lot of committees. And if I'm on a plane and
somebody opens a conversation that I really don't
want to pursue, asking me what I do, I tell them I'm
an astrophysicist and that's the end of that
conversation. I tell them I work in planetary
science and the conversation will last until the
plane lands. I think that's a good measure of the
fact we've done it. Selling ourselves to
Congress. That's another question.
I think we've probably done a better job of that
than most of the other physical sciences.
What effect, if any, do you think on the public
interest and funding is the fact that we found no
trace whatsoever of light anywhere in the solar
system except Earth, and in particular not on
Mars?
i think that stimulated our funding uh during the
period of time that we were on our survey of the
solar system mode we're now past that i think it may
actually curtail our funding now because i think
what we have done with that is that we have made
people more aware that this is all we got and we
better save it so i think in the long run our efforts
have actually done a better job of selling the need
to really understand this planet as a unit, so that
we probably enhanced the area we now refer to as
Earth Sciences.
How did planetary studies get started at New
Mexico State? In the 50s, Clyde W. Tombaugh, who
had moved to White Sands, At White Sands, he set up
tracking cameras for studying the ballistic
trajectories of various test rockets and that
sort of thing. And in the mid-'50s, he decided that
he wanted to free himself up from some of the
details that he was forced to accept if he
continued to live at the White Sands Proving
Grounds. So he requested the right from the
military to move his contracts to New Mexico State
University, which was a small university. Its
research was centered in the central office,
which would give him first class service. So he
moved to New Mexico State. Among the people that he
had acquired to work with him at White Sands was
Bradford Smith. And after they moved to New Mexico
State, the two of them worked as a team to develop
ground-based monitoring of basically Mars when
they first started, with an eye toward
understanding the seasonal aspects for space
exploration. And then later they acquired the
services of Elmer Rees, a gifted amateur
astronomer all of the right attributes to be an
outstanding observational scientist where did
they get the money to do this at first it was air
force and then they moved to nasa for me okay and
then uh Were you the next hire that came along? No.
Clyde had a faculty slot in Earth Sciences. And he
expanded his contracts to the point that he had an
observing team, which I think he had as many as five
observers on staff at a time. I was the first PhD to
join his staff. And Clyde was still the PI of the
group when I joined, although he retired soon
after that, and Brad Smith became the PI. Now, what
happened then? I mean, what department were you
in? I was in earth science. And in 1969, the
astronomy separated from earth science and
became an individual department.
William Reitmeier was the department head. And by
the time I arrived, there were three
stellar galactic type astronomers. And Herb
Beebe was the theoretician. He was actually a
solar astronomer. So the fact that the Sacramento
Peak Observatory was there was extremely
attractive to him, because he could do his
observing there and then do his modeling at the
university. Well, what's happened since then? I
mean, what's happened to the astronomy
department? Has it grown much? Over the years, we
attempted several times to set up an effective
consortium to build a large telescope. And we have
managed to do that. University of Chicago,
Princeton University, University of Washington
and Washington State and New Mexico State have
developed a consortium. Recently, Johns Hopkins
and the Institute of Advanced Studies at
Princeton have come in. We have a three and a half
meter honeycomb-type
Naismith-focused telescope that will be coming
online within the next six months. It's now
waiting for its secondary. Everything else is in
position and tested. And it will be located, it is
located at? Apache Peak, which is 100 miles from
the campus on paved, maintained roads. And we have
remote observing capabilities. How many faculty
do you have now in the astronomy department? We
have two planetary astronomers that are on tenure
track. Myself is tenured, and we have a junior
person who has been with us for a year and a half.
That's Mark Marley.
Jack Burns is our current department head, and he
is a radio astronomer, interacts considerably
with the VLA. Rene Walterbos, galactic
astronomy. Walt Sanders and
Kurt Anderson, both
stellar population galactic structure types.
Bernie McNamara, variable stars, catastrophic
variable stars.
That's the tenure track group. We have Bill Weber,
retired from New Hampshire, high energy
astrophysics. He's a university professor. Nick
Devereaux, a young NASA investigator. Galactic
astronomy. Andre Klippen, the Tombaugh Fellow.
We have developed an endowment in honor of Clyde
Tombaugh. And Andre, a Soviet cosmologist, is our
first fellow.
Do you planetary types talk with the other
astronomers much? Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of
fact, the major thrust that's developing in
galactic astronomy at New Mexico State is
hydrodynamics.
Yes, because hydrodynamics is quite well
developed in planetary astronomy. Mark Marley is
quite interested in energy balance in the upper
atmosphere, and so am I. So the overlaps with the
Most newly acquired galactic people are open,
friendly, and very collaborative. Some of the
older traditional astronomers are still sitting
off in their stuffy corners, but they're
literally isolated from both sides now. Well, of
course, you have the advantage that you don't just
have a snapshot, which is all you get. You can
actually see things changing on Jupiter, which
makes it a little more tricky to make predictions.
Actually, our radio astronomers can see things
changing, too. supersonic jets change with time,
too. So the concepts of modeling and displaying
time changes and that sort of thing really do
overlap. That brings me to another point, which is
that radio astronomy, which is what I started out
in, was really founded not by astronomers but by
engineers. And in the Well, the 40s and the 50s. It
had a hard time getting started in this country
because the astronomers at the time had about the
same attitude towards the dirty engineering work
as they did towards looking at the planets. And
radio astronomy has never had a bias, as far as I
know, against planetary astronomy. How do you get
along with the radio astronomers now? because
it's a new generation of people. The old timers are
mostly gone. But I wanted your opinion on that. And
many of the numerics are so parallel.
Around the turn of this century, planetary
astronomy was still a significant part of
astronomy. Henry Norris Russell did papers on the
atmosphere of Venus and so forth. But by the end of
World War I, it was basically dead. I mean, there
were a few people still working, but it was
basically dead. Who or what killed it, in your
opinion? probably
the lack of infrared observations coming along at
the right time we really had a dearth of new
observational input and most of the interesting
spectral features are in the infrared,
unfortunately. The development of large
telescopes that did not enhance our spatial
resolution sort of made the planets not that
desirable. And then the fact that we weren't able
to use those large light buckets to reach into
another frequency domain and give us some more
constraints is probably what really put it down.
Gerard de Bacalaur has a... vehement two-word
answer to that question. Percival Law. Do you
think that would have an effect?
No, I don't. I think the fact that you see too many
bubbles of air, Earth's air, in a big telescope had
the biggest effect because much of the money was
being recruited to support the big telescopes.
And we really weren't competitive on them. really
couldn't pull new, exciting information out. If
the spatial resolution had been directly
proportional to the diameter of the telescope,
Percival Lowell couldn't have touched us. The
idea of what we would have seen on Mars would have
just been so intriguing that... I wanted to ask
your... This is a detail that may not get in the
book, but I want your opinion. You know, now with
CCDs, you can beat the scene and take pictures of,
in particular, Mars, that look like the sort of
stuff that those of us who have looked at Mars
through telescopes will occasionally see but
could never photograph or even draw.
Were you relieved to see that those images
actually were just like what you'd been seeing in
the past? Sure. The idea of being able to record and
then go back and analyze is always exciting. Sure,
you believe what you see. After you understand how
the human eye interprets things, you know that
those details are there. But you can't remember
them. You can't intercompare them. The classical
example of this is Elmer Rees, who had observed an
excellent observer. And when he was finally
allowed to have the A Mountain, the Tortugas
Mountain, photographic record, so he could go
back and see what a south equatorial belt storm
looked like in 71 and compare it to 75, it was like,
you know, manna from heaven to him. One thing
that's been a petty annoyance of mine, and I wonder
if it's been of yours, is that the pictures they
release of Mars and the whole disk from various
spacecraft don't look like it looks when you look
directly at it. They fiddle around with the data.
Does that kind of tick you off? Yes, it kind of ticks
me off. And there's a fair amount of it going on now
in ground base, too. High pass filtering, edge
finders being used to really enhance the edge
structures, total destruction of the
photometry. One of the things that bothers me a
little bit about the Voyager representation of
Jupiter is the fact that in order to get high
contrast images into the American living room, we
grossly enhance the color. And we have left the
public with the concept of the appearance of these
cloud decks. It's wrong. Lately, there's been a
fair amount of effort to make planetary science
practical, and there's certainly been a lot of
publicity about killer asteroids and comets, the
ozone layer, global warming. Do you think that's
gone too far, or do you think it's just about right,
or not enough? I think it's gone too far. I don't
think that that is the real application of
planetary science. I think that... The real
application of planetary science in the field of
education is the idea of physical processes. More
than one laboratory to understand what has gone on
over time, developing the general understanding
of time dependence on Earth. We could do real
structures there. Killer asteroids is... I don't
think planetary people invented that. I think SDI
people invented that, looking for a home. And I
think that's appalling. I think it's misleading.
I think it's asking the American public to pay
attention to something that is not as likely to
happen as some of the other pending catastrophes
that we should be expending resources on.
What do you think is going to happen? Well, first of
all, do you think planetary astronomy is kind of
mined out now or not? No, I don't think so. I think
that...
Well, I talk to elementary students a lot.
Elementary students are ready to go to the moon,
even if they have to live in a hole. As long as I will
let them have television, they would love to go to
the moon. The concept of a 14-day... day is
fascinating to them. Sixth graders would like to
take pregnant women to the moon so they can watch
the children grow up under low G.
It's this concept of just a little different
environment. I think we've still got a lot of very
interesting stimulating this same toward really
improving education really improving critical
ability do you think there will be money to support
planetary strategy no I think we're headed toward
period time where support really is going to
decrease and then I think that maybe 20 years from
now we'll we'll see an increase in interest in it
again and it'll come back um i forgot to ask you one
thing about the situation in new mexico state now
it was a small college 30 years ago what was how
would you characterize the attitude of the
higher-ups there you know whatever they are the
regents or the deans or the presidents or
chancellors towards having um you know, a real
research group, and in particular astronomy.
Were they amazed that there was such a subject? No,
not at all, because the proper people of Pasadena
chased the Caltech people out of Arroyo Sepe to the
White Sands Proving Ground, so that the
development of The space program is very closely
associated with New Mexico in the minds of most of
the people there. The first
satellite that was to go into Earth orbit that
didn't get off the launch pad carried a
communications package that had been built at New
Mexico State. New Mexico State has been very
strong in telemetry and communications, so that
we came in two this area from the technological
side, and the physical science was second to
develop there, but it was natural that it did
develop there. New Mexico State has a very large
involvement in military funding.
They entrap, process, and deliver a large portion
of the data that's acquired at the White Sands
Missile Range.
You're undoubtedly aware of the fact that
astronomy is, I guess, without astronomy in
general and planetary astronomy in particular,
is the most popular science with the general
public. How come?
Well, it's not quite as mundane as Earth-based
science. There's still a little bit of the
fascination of science fiction in it. But at the
same time, because people have been living on a
planet, they've got all the fundamental basis for
understanding it. So it's something that's
familiar but mind-stretching at the same time.
It's been my opinion that astronomy is the best
carrot that you can use as a teacher to get people to
learn science. Do you agree?
No. and elementary students like bugs just as well
when does that start to change about the sixth
grade any idea why
i guess they get tired of bugs when you've done
grasshoppers too how far can you go